Magic can be trained passively while training other skills. The passive training methods can be tedious or expensive before High Level Alchemy becomes available, so consider low-effort or cheaper alternatives to get through the early levels.

At higher levels, Magic can be trained much faster through casting multi-target burst or barrage spells on Ancient Magicks. An efficient way to do this is on Slayer tasks, as certain Slayer monsters (such as dust devils and Greater Nechryael) can be bursted or barraged for fast Slayer experience.

In terms of macro-efficiency, defensive attack style may be used to gain more overall experience (1 Defence xp + 1.33 Magic xp on defensive vs 2 Magic xp on standard) when training via combat. Defensive casting is a viable way to train Defence at lower levels while melee training prioritises Strength and Attack to meet Warrior's Guild entry requirements, as well as at higher levels where cost per Magic xp is not a concern. However, standard casting offers the highest pure magic experience, which might be preferable to players seeking to minimise costs.

Levels 1–55: Starting off
Levels 1–10/34: Questing
Early levels can be skipped by completing quests that give Magic experience. Completing Witch's Potion and Imp Catcher gives a total of 1,200 Magic experience, which is enough to get from level 1 to 10. Both quests are very short and have no requirements, and they can be done at any level.

To get to level 34 only by questing, completing Fairytale I - Growing Pains or The Grand Tree allows Watchtower to be completed. Completing all three and Lumbridge Guide subquest of Recipe for Disaster would grant an additional 20,900 experience and get the player up to level 34.

Levels 4–55/99: Enchanting bolts
Enchanting gem-tipped bolts using the Enchant Crossbow Bolt spell is one of the fastest ways to train magic and can be done while running or doing other activities. Each cast enchants a set of 10 bolts, and is automatically done every 3 ticks for 10 sets. With accurate timing, players can speed up the process by holding down the space bar and rapidly clicking on the spell. This way the spell can be cast every tick, which increases experience rates by an even larger amount. 

Since bolts and runes are stackable, bolts are easily enchanted while doing other activities, such as questing, training Agility, or while running. Additionally, casting the spell does not interrupt other actions. 

However, this method can be very expensive, so it is only recommended for players who wish to progress through  early levels as fast as possible and are willing to invest large amounts of gp. Players who plan to train Magic passively while doing other activities are advised to switch to casting Low Level Alchemy at level 21, as this is much cheaper. At level 55, it is recommended to switch to casting High Level Alchemy, which provides higher xp/cast and is more profitable. 

Experience rates and costs are shown in the table below. Note that the prices may be inaccurate due to low trade volumes. Some options may also not be viable due to low supply.
 levelEnchantmentRunesXP/cast Material cost eachAssumes an elemental staff is used in place of basic runes. Profit eachXP/hAssumes manual casting with occasional errors (5500 casts/h). If manually casting one can cast every game tick (6000 casts/h). Or if casting automatically one can cast at about 1/3 of this rate (~2000 casts/h). GP/XP4Opal949,5007Sapphire1793,50024Pearl29          159,50027Emerald37203,50029Topaz33181,50049Ruby59324,50057Diamond67368,50068Dragonstone78429,00087Onyx97533,500

Levels 7–21: Lvl-1 Enchant
From level 7 to 21, enchant sapphire or opal jewellery by using the Lvl-1 Enchant spell. The spell can be cast manually every 3 ticks, and each cast gives 17.5 experience.

Players can gain up to around 32,000 experience per hour. It will take 250 casts to get from level 7 to 21.

Another option is to cast this spell in the Mage Training Arena, which will yield much greater experience, and pizazz points in the minigame.

Levels 21–55: Low Level Alchemy
At level 21, cast Low Level Alchemy (also known as "low alching") to convert items into coins. The spell can be cast every 3 ticks, and each cast gives 31 experience. This method can be done while doing other activities, such as questing, training Agility, or while running.

Cast Low Level Alchemy on noted items or stacks of items bought from the Grand Exchange. To decide what items to cast Low Level Alchemy on, see this calculator for more details. Cast the spell on cheap items, such as rune arrows. Using more expensive items (such as rune armour pieces) will result in a loss due to their price being tied to their High Alchemy value. Because of this, this method will likely result in a small loss.

Another option is to cast this spell in the Mage Training Arena, which will yield much greater experience, and pizazz points in the minigame.

Players can gain up to around 60,000 experience per hour if standing still. Expect much lower rates when doing other activities. It would take 5,214 casts to get from level 21 to 55.

Levels 1–55: Other early training methods
Levels 1–55: Killing crabs
Killing crabs with combat spells requires very little attention and offers relatively fast experience at lower levels. Use the highest-level combat spell available for the best damage output. Players who wish to spend less money on Magic training may want to keep using Fire Strike instead of switching to the more expensive bolt and blast spells. Chaos gauntlets (requires completion of Family Crest) can be used with Fire Bolt to achieve a max hit of one below that of Fire Blast, to achieve higher experiences rates without the increased cost. If you are waiting for respawns, consider switching to a denser spawn or a higher Hitpoints crab. If you are taking too much damage from crabs, consider moving to a smaller spawn or lower Hitpoints crab.

There are five types of crabs the player can train on, and all have high Hitpoints, very low Defence and deal minimal damage. They become aggressive when walked by, and stay aggressive for 10 minutes. After 10 minutes, the player has to reset aggressiveness by running away far enough, usually a minimap's length. The player should choose a spot that makes two or three spawns aggressive at the same time.

Ammonite Crabs on Fossil Island (requires Bone Voyage quest). Considered the best crab for training, each crab has 100 Hitpoints. Spawn areas are normally incredibly busy. They also drop unidentified fossils, which can be turned in for experience lamps in Varrock Museum after cleaning. Wind Blast or greater recommended, unless using Chaos gauntlets.
Sand Crabs in Hosidius. They have 60 Hitpoints and have no quest requirements, but are usually crowded.
Rock Crabs in Rellekka. They have no quest requirements and are usually less crowded than Sand Crabs and Ammonite Crabs, but only have 50 Hitpoints.
Frost Crabs in the Ruins of Tapoyauik dungeon in Varlamore. They have 60 Hitpoints and require completion of The Heart of Darkness quest. They have a 100% elemental weakness to fire spells which means they take double the normal damage from Fire Strike and Fire Bolt.
Gemstone Crab in Tlati Rainforest in Varlamore. This crab has infinite hitpoints only requires completion of Children of the Sun quest to access. It will move every 10 minutes requiring the player to travel through a nearby cave to get to the next spawn location. If you are standing off the side of the crab it will not do damage to you. Making this a good monster to train your magic on early as you can train on it entirely safely.

Having at least level 30 Defence is recommended before starting Magic training on these monsters to mitigate the damage. If the player has low Defence, bring some food and use defensive equipment that does not penalise Magic accuracy too much.

Equip any staff that can autocast combat spells. Elemental staves are recommended, as they also provide unlimited elemental runes corresponding to their type (a staff of air provides unlimited air runes). At level 30 Magic and Attack, use a smoke battlestaff if the player can afford one. This staff provides a 10% increase in accuracy and damage when casting spells from the standard spellbook, which will increase experience rates.

Levels 1–55: Exploiting elemental weaknesses
Elemental weaknesses increase both accuracy and damage on their corresponding elemental spell by a certain percentage, and commonly-accessible monsters have up to 100% elemental weakness. This allows cheap, effective, more efficient magic training than killing elementally-neutral monsters, though will provide less AFK time than standard crabs.

100% weaknesses double the corresponding spells' damage, allowing, assuming no other damage bonuses, Strike spells to hit up to 16 and Bolt spells to hit up to 24 (or 30 with Chaos gauntlets).

Ice Giants are easily accessible and safespottable in areas such as White Wolf Mountain and the Asgarnian Ice Dungeon, having no quest requirements. They have 70 Hitpoints, 1 Magic, and a 100% Fire weakness. 
Fire Giants are most easily accessible and safespottable in the Catacombs of Kourend and Giants' Den. Killing Fire Giants in here also allows drops of Ancient shards and Dark Totem pieces. They have 111-150 Hitpoints, 1 Magic, and a 100% Water weakness. (Level 104 Fire Giants have +50 Magic Defence.)
Frost Crabs are accessible in the Ruins of Tapoyauik in Varlamore, requiring completion of The Heart of Darkness quest. They have 60 Hitpoints, 1 Magic, -50 Magic Defence, and a 100% Fire weakness.
Ghosts are plentiful in the north-west passage in the bottom floor of the Stronghold of Security, and are additionally weak to the effects of a salve amulet (i). They have 75-80 Hitpoints, 1 Magic, and a 50% Air weakness (Level 77 ghosts have +55 Magic Defence.). While they are only 50% weak, this is compensated by salve weakness and cost saving effect of Air spells using catalytic runes to cost, as a staff of air will cover all of the elemental runes needed.

Equip any staff that can autocast combat spells. Elemental staves are recommended, as they also provide unlimited elemental runes corresponding to their type (a staff of air provides unlimited air runes). At level 30 Magic and Attack, use a smoke battlestaff if the player can afford one. This staff provides a 10% increase in accuracy and damage when casting spells from the standard spellbook, which will increase experience rates.
Levels 1–55: Splashing combat spells
Splashing combat spells on weak monsters offers very slow experience, but only requires player input once every 20 minutes. To splash, attack an NPC while wearing equipment that gives at least -64 Magic attack bonus. Although no damage is dealt, players will still gain the base experience from casting the spell. Simply equip any staff that can autocast the combat spell used (such as an elemental staff), turn on Auto Retaliate, and interact with the game client every 20 minutes to keep splashing the opponent.

Experience rates vary depending on the spell used, ranging from 6,600 to 37,800 experience per hour. See this page for more details about splashing.

Levels 43–55: Superheat Item
From level 43 to 55, one possible option is to cast Superheat Item to smelt ores into bars. The spell can be cast every 3 ticks, and each cast gives 53 Magic experience. This method offers relatively fast Magic experience at these levels and also gives passive Smithing experience. Casting the spell usually costs some money, depending on the Grand Exchange prices.

With decent focus, players can gain up to 97,000 Magic experience per hour. The amount of Smithing experience gained varies depending on the ore used. It will take 2,195 casts to get from level 43 to 55.

See the Superheat Item page for a table with the cost per experience for each type of bar.

Levels 45–55: Camelot Teleport
Repeatedly casting Camelot Teleport offers around 80,000 experience per hour, with 55.5 experience per cast. Training from level 45 to 55 requires a total of 1,895 law runes, which costs  assuming a staff of air is equipped.

Passive training methods
From level 55 onwards Magic can be feasibly trained passively while doing other activities. Passive training methods may offer slow Magic experience per hour in real time. Players who wish to actively gain Magic experience should consider using faster methods below.

Level 55+: High Level Alchemy
At level 55, cast High Level Alchemy (commonly known as "alching") to convert various items into coins. The spell can be cast every 5 ticks, and each cast gives 65 experience. This is one of the best training methods for gaining passive Magic experience as it can be done while doing other activities, and there are always bulk purchasable items (from the Grand Exchange or players, such as smiths) that allow profiting several hundred of coins per cast.

Cast High Level Alchemy on noted items or stacks of items bought from the Grand Exchange. To decide what items to cast High Level Alchemy on, see this calculator for more details. It is recommended to have spare capital to be able to buy a large number of items and nature runes at once, so the player would not have to constantly buy more once they run out. Cheaper items require less capital, but usually offer worse profit. Some options may not be viable due to low buy limits or high capital requirements.

For the best efficiency, cast High Level Alchemy while doing other activities, such as questing, training Agility, melee combat, and farm runs. When alching items, place the items in the 4th row, all the way to the left, to eliminate the need to move the mouse.

Players can gain up to 78,000 experience per hour if standing still. When casting High Level Alchemy while doing other activities, players can expect much lower rates, anywhere from 20,000 to 50,000 experience per hour.

Level 65+: Bake Pie
Completion of the quest Lunar Diplomacy is required to cast Bake Pie.

At level 65, players can train Cooking by baking pies using the Bake Pie spell on the Lunar spellbook. This offers relatively fast Cooking experience at a low amount of effort, and also a decent amount of passive Magic experience. However, this method is usually fairly expensive due to the low supply of uncooked pies, and some options may not be viable due to low trading volumes.

Players can gain up to 113,000 passive Magic experience per hour. For more information about the costs and Cooking experience rates, see Pay-to-play Cooking training.

Level 82+: Magic Imbue
Completion of the quest Lunar Diplomacy is required to cast Magic Imbue.

At level 82, players can cast Magic Imbue on the Lunar spellbook. It is mainly used when training Runecraft through crafting lava runes (or other combination runes), as casting the spell negates the need for talismans. If training Runecraft this way, players will gain a decent amount of passive Magic experience over time.

Similarly to High Level Alchemy, Magic Imbue can also be cast for the Magic experience alone while doing other activities. Magic Imbue only requires one click to cast and does not interrupt any actions, such as fishing. However, it can only be cast once every 21 ticks (12.6 seconds), costs money, and offers very slow experience by itself.

Players can gain up to around 20,000–24,000 passive Magic experience per hour. Casting the spell costs  per experience, assuming the player is wielding a steam battlestaff (or an equivalent combination, such as water battlestaff with a tome of fire or fire battlestaff with a tome of water).

Levels 62–99: Bursting/barraging on Ancient Magicks
After completing the Desert Treasure I quest, the player unlocks Ancient Magicks. The burst and barrage spells on this spellbook can be used to kill multiple monsters at once in multi-combat areas. This offers very fast experience, but can be somewhat expensive depending on the spell used and the monster killed.

The lowest-level burst spell, Smoke Burst, becomes available at level 62. Players may want to train with other methods until level 70, so they can use Ice Burst and wear better equipment (such as the occult necklace) for better damage output. Cast the highest-level multi-target spell for the best damage output. However, Smoke Burst remains a good cheaper alternative even at higher levels.

When bursting or barraging, use a weapon that can autocast Ancient Magicks. While this is not necessary, manually casting the spells adds a lot of extra effort and can become tedious over time. The kodai wand is the best weapon to use as it offers a 15% bonus in Magic damage, has a 15% chance of negating rune costs when casting offensive spells, and provides unlimited water runes. The nightmare staff is a good alternative as it also has the same Magic damage bonus, though it lacks the rune-saving effect and does not provide water runes. Another good alternative is the ancient sceptre (or its variants) as this provides a 5% Magic damage bonus, alongside a passive effect that increases the effects of Ancient Magicks by 10%. The Blue moon spear is a buyable alternative, boasting the same 5% Magic damage bonus, but missing the passive effect of the sceptre.  The Dragon Hunter Wand is another buyable alternative, providing 10% Magic damage bonus while allowing for autocasting Ancient Magicks. The ancient staff and the master wand do not provide any Magic damage bonus, so they are only recommended for short-term use.

Slayer

Many Slayer monsters can be killed with burst or barrage spells on task for fast Slayer experience. This is one of the most efficient ways to train Slayer and Magic, and it usually breaks even or profits.

Monsters that are commonly bursted or barraged on task include dust devils, Greater Nechryaels,  Warped Jellies, and smoke devils. If using alternative accounts to lure the monsters, it is also viable to kill abyssal demons, the TzHaar, and Mutated Bloodvelds.

For optimal training of Slayer, it is best to train Magic up to level 82 through the passive training methods above, and then use a saturated heart to boost to 94 for Ice Barrage. If the player does not have a saturated heart, the player should instead train to 94 via the passive methods. Ice Barrage is the highest-tier barrage spell, allowing for incredibly fast magic experience. However, since Slayer training generally offers a lot of passive Magic experience, players can start Slayer training even at level 70 Magic and use weaker spells until level 94 Magic. While this would be slightly slower overall, players would not have to put in the extra effort of passively training Magic while training other skills.

Killing Maniacal monkeys

Killing maniacal monkeys in Kruk's Dungeon is the fastest viable way to train Magic in real time. This requires having started Monkey Madness II until the part the player reaches Kruk's Dungeon. Maniacal monkeys spawn in very large numbers, have a long aggression range, and have very low Magic defence, making them ideal for bursting or barraging. This method costs money, and the exact cost depends on the player's equipment.

Use equipment that maximises Magic damage and Prayer bonuses. Having a higher max hit increases damage output a lot and makes casting effectively cheaper, as each cast would deal more damage for the same rune cost. Magic accuracy does not affect damage output much because the monkeys have low Magic defence, so prioritise Prayer bonus after Magic damage.

Having 2 alternative accounts to stack the monkeys is recommended should the player have access to them, as this makes this method fairly low-effort as well.

Experience rates vary depending on the exact method, equipment, and type of the spell used. With Ice Burst, players can gain up to around 310,000 experience per hour. With Ice Barrage, it is possible to gain up to around 400,000 experience per hour.

 Killing Zombie pirates 
Zombie pirates can be found in level 10-11 wilderness, near the chaos altar. As this is in the wilderness, players may attack you, however veteran players may find it fairly easy to escape (especially with Ice Burst and Barrage) due to the wilderness ditch being a short walk away. Regardless, it's recommended that the player doesn't risk any items they're not willing to lose. The player should use the Protect from Magic prayer while killing Zombie pirates as the chaos druids in the area are also plentiful and aggressive. Be wary that the chaos druids can teleblock you, which means the best escape from a PKer is usually to run south.

The Accursed sceptre (a) and Salve amulet(ei) are central to this strategy — The Accursed sceptre increases magic accuracy and damage by an additional 50% while attacking non-player characters in the wilderness. Similarly, the Salve amulet(ei) grants a 20% increase to the wearer's magic accuracy and magic damage when fighting undead monsters, like the Zombie pirate. Being in the wilderness, the player can also use Blighted ancient ice sack in order to cast Ice Burst or Ice Barrage. Although being in the wilderness comes with a risk, the Accursed sceptre and Salve amulet allow players to hit extremely high and kill the enemies quickly — even in low risk gear. There is an altar nearby for the player to restore their prayer, however it's recommended that the player brings 6-8 Blighted super restore as well as using the altar as the potions have a low cost and provide security and convenience.

In order to make this a worthwhile activity, the player must have completed the Medium Wilderness achievement diary; This increases the average value of Zombie pirate drops to . Before completion of the diary, the average drop value is . 

Players should bring a Looting bag, some blighted food, 1-2 Stamina potions, and 4-5 Saradomin brews in case of Player killers.

It's also recommended that the player has previously used the Teleport anchoring scroll, as this prevents the player from getting teleported around by the chaos druids that also attack. The scrolls effects are permanent.

Plugins on Runelite can help to mitigate risk and work so well they are, arguably, essential. The Wilderness Player Alarm plugin flashes the screen when a player is in view distance. The Player Indicators plugin can also make the PKers stand out more. Additionally, the player should enable "Skull prevention" in the ingame settings. The player can quite easily make decent money using this method.

Bandits (Bandit camp)
Killing bandits two tiles west from the door inside The Big Heist Lodge draws the aggression of all nearby bandits, automatically stacking them together for area of effect spells. This can be done as early as level 68 Magic, to cast Blood Burst or Blood Barrage. To do this it is needed to have a Saradomin or Zamorak item, a staff that can autocast ancient magicks, and a large supply of runes to cast with. It is recommended to wear items that boost magic damage and melee defence to kill bandits faster and reduce potential damage taken. Players can reach rates of 150,000 Magic experience per hour bursting or 230,000 Magic experience per hour barraging. The total experience per hour when defensive autocasting is up to 235,000 experience per hour bursting or 305,000 experience per hour barraging.

The life leech effect from blood spells outheals damage taken, making it unlikely to die here, unless Auto Retaliate disables after the 20 minute AFK timer. This method is particularly convenient to minimise gameplay inputs, similar to the method used with Guthan's within the Nightmare zone. This method can be quite expensive though, as bursting will cost  per hour and barraging will cost , and unlike the Slayer method will not recoup this from monster drops.

Other
For the players who have not started Monkey Madness II but have 65 Slayer, bursting dust devils in the Catacombs of Kourend is a cheap alternative to maniacal monkeys. They also have valuable drops which offset the cost of the runes.

For accounts with low Slayer level, bursting Temple Spiders in the eastern Forthos Dungeon is another option. You will need 43 prayer to Protect Melee or use blood spells to mitigate damage. These spiders drop a significant amount of herbs, seeds, alchables, various runes, and more, which can help pay for the expenses of prayer potions and runes.

In addition, those who have a fire cape can train on the TzHaar-Ket within the inner circle of Mor Ul Rek. This is a slower method, however it is still considerably faster than others, while also providing the opportunity to make a profit with the possible Obsidian armour and weapon drops. This is about equivalent experience to training on skeletal monkeys in the Ape Atoll Dungeon from Monkey Madness I.

Lunar spells
After completing the Lunar Diplomacy quest, the player unlocks the Lunar spellbook. Many of the spells offered by this spellbook can offer great experience, and some can process materials for gp while doing so.

Level 71+ Cure Me
Starting at level 71 Magic, or as early as level 65 with access to boosts, casting Cure Me from the Lunar spellbook can achieve up to 414,000 experience per hour optimally, costing  per hour, not including Prayer potions. Cure Me can be cast once every game tick (0.6 seconds), and the Araxytes in the Morytania Spider Cave are capable of continuously inflicting the player with Venom. Wear armour with the highest prayer bonus possible, such as sunfire fanatic armour, vestment robes, and ring of the gods (i). Bring prayer potions and a rune pouch containing astral, law, and cosmic runes to cast Cure Me with. Find a section of the cave without other players killing Araxytes, activate Protect from melee, and allow at least two Araxytes to attack you. Click on the Cure Me spell at least once every 0.6 seconds, which can be timed easily with either a metronome or by watching the XP drops in the corner. Spam clicking is not necessary and as the spell is limited in how fast it can be cast, so adjust the speed of clicks based on how often you receive the game message . Doing this method from level 71 Magic to level 99 would cost approximately  and take about 29.5 hours total.

After level 74 Magic, the spell Cure Group becomes available, which can be used in a similar manner to yield an additional 30,000 xp/hr compared to Cure Me, but costs  more per hour and requires a second account to be the one getting venomed. Cure Other is also possible with the use of a second account, but requires twice as many clicks and yields less xp per hour. It does cost significantly less to use, at only  per hour with the use of an earth staff or similar, assuming the same casting speed is maintained as Cure Me.

Level 81+ Potion share
Starting at level 81 Magic, or earlier with access to boosts, casting Stat Restore Pot Share from the Lunar spellbook can achieve up to around 140,000 experience per hour optimally, costing  per hour, assuming a Mud battlestaff or similar is used to save runes. This method also needs a second player, although it can be fairly easy to find players standing around Banks who can be used to cast this spell, though ensure only one player is within the 5x5 area of tiles around you as to not waste doses of Restore potion. Alternatively, only hold 1 dose potions to not have to worry about this, although xp/hr will be lower with more time spent banking.

After level 84 Magic, the spell Boost Potion Share becomes available, which can be used in a similar manner to yield an additional ~5,000 xp/hr compared to Stat Restore Pot Share, but costs  per hour instead. It is recommended to use Attack potions for this as they are very cheap.

Levels 80–99: String Jewellery
Casting String Jewellery on the Lunar spellbook requires relatively low amount of effort. The spell takes 1.8 seconds per amulet strung, or 48.6 seconds for an inventory, and gives 4 Crafting experience and 83 Magic experience per amulet. Once clicked, it will string each amulet one by one in the inventory, giving experience for each amulet strung. Using a mud battlestaff is recommended.

Players can gain up to 150,000 Magic (along with 6,265 Crafting) experience per hour.

Levels 86–99: Plank Make 
Completion of the quest Dream Mentor is required to cast Plank Make.

At level 86, players can auto-cast Plank Make on mahogany logs. This method will generate around 90,000 Magic experience per hour, which is around 1,000 casts, or less depending on banking speed, as well as generating a small amount of profit. Each inventory takes around 90 seconds, meaning it is a quite idle method of training. Alternatively, players can manually cast Plank Make on each log for around 166,000 Magic experience per hour. By casting Magic Imbue between every 7th manual cast of Plank Make, players can achieve over 180,000 Magic experience per hour. 

The only downside is that mahogany logs can be expensive to buy in bulk if starting with a low amount of money, and the spell is locked behind Dream Mentor. Managing Miscellania can be a way of accumulating mahogany logs at a discount, after completing Royal Trouble.

 Other methods 
Levels 7–99: Profitable methods
While it may be beneficial to find a consistent money maker and then train Magic with the faster but more expensive methods, it is possible to train magic without any loss. There is no way to profit up to level 7, so for new players interested in training Magic as soon as possible, it's suggested to do the Imp Catcher quest after obtaining the money for the beads from the Stronghold of Security.

Check the jewellery Calculator to ensure you are enchanting the most profitable item, and check the page of each spell to see the currently profitable items to use them on before buying anything. Some of these spells require additional quests or tasks to use; be sure that you can use a spell before buying materials for it, and that you know the mechanics of the spell itself before casting it not to waste materials.
+LevelsIcon  Method and info XP per castXP/hInvestment required per castProfit per cast 7–27File:Lvl-1 Enchant.pngUsing Lvl-1 Enchant to enchant Sapphire jewellery. Assuming you have all the materials, you can enchant approximately 1,600 items an hour, although selling finished products on the Grand Exchange to buy more runes and rings will bring this number down. Training from 7–27 will take 519 casts and bring a net profit of , and should take about 20 minutes, not including buying and selling materials.17.528,00027–49File:Lvl-2 Enchant.png Using Lvl-2 Enchant to turn Emerald rings into Rings of Dueling. Assuming you have all the materials, you can enchant approximately 1,600 rings an hour, although selling finished products on the Grand Exchange to buy more runes and rings will bring this number down. Training from 27–49 will take 2,216 casts and bring a net profit of , and should take about 80 minutes, not including buying and selling materials. Lvl-2 Enchant has a list of profitable items that varies.3759,20049–55File:Lvl-3 Enchant.pngUsing Lvl-3 Enchant to enchant Ruby or Topaz jewellery. This level is more volatile and can require significantly more investment; keeping with Emerald rings may be preferred, as Lvl-3 Enchant can sometimes result in a loss. Assuming you have all the materials, you can enchant approximately 1,600 rings an hour, although selling finished products on the Grand Exchange to buy more runes and rings will bring this number down. Training from 49–55 will take 1,270 casts and bring a net profit of  and should take about 48 minutes, not including buying and selling materials. 59 94,400 55 File:High Level Alchemy.pngCasting High Level Alchemy. You can cast High level alchemy up to 1,200 times an hour, and there are many tools and calculator available that you can use to ensure the items you alchemise bring you profit. Check the calculator provided, and always test a single item before buying in bulk. From level 55 forward, there's no single most effective way to train, so pick from below which one works best for you.6578,000 Various; see this calculatorVarious; see this calculatorBonus: 55–99 File:High Level Alchemy.pngSome players decide to keep doing high level alchemy all the way to level 99. Doing so will take 165 hours, but can bring millions of profit depending on the items chosen. It will take 197,966 casts to reach level 99.6578,000Various; see this calculatorVarious; see this calculator56File:Charge Water Orb.png Casting Charge Water Orb can bring good profit per hour, but requires running through the Taverley Dungeon. Use a staff of water to save on rune costs. With 80 Agility, about 505 water orbs can be made per hour, down to 450 orbs an hour at 70 Agility, or 280 with no Agility shortcuts. 6633,30057File:Lvl-4 Enchant.pngUsing Lvl-4 Enchant to enchant Diamond jewellery. A significant investment tends to be required for Diamond jewellery, making orbs more efficient. Nonetheless, it's still possible to turn a profit, and with enough cash to invest, one can expect rates of over 100,000 magic experience an hour.67111,30060File:Charge Earth Orb.pngCasting Charge Earth Orb can bring good profit per hour, but being in the Wilderness brings the risk of being PKed. Use a staff of earth to save on rune costs. About 525 earth orbs can be made per hour. 7036,500 63File:Charge Fire Orb.pngCasting Charge Fire Orb can bring good profit per hour, but requires running through the Taverley Dungeon. Use a staff of fire to save on rune costs. With 80 Agility, about 525 fire orbs can be made per hour, down to 450 at 70 Agility, and 280 with no Agility shortcuts.7338,00066File:Charge Air Orb.pngCasting Charge Air Orb can bring good profit per hour, but requires running through the Edgeville Dungeon, through the Wilderness. Use a staff of air to save on rune costs. It's highly advised to only bring 81 cosmic runes per trip, in the event you get killed by another player.7640,000 68File:Lvl-5 Enchant.pngUsing Lvl-5 Enchant to enchant dragonstone jewellery. At this level, players without the gold to invest tens of millions of coins will find enchanting jewellery to be impractical. These experience levels are not using autocast.  78124,80071File:Hunter Kit.pngHunter Kit can bring a decent profit as long as a staff of earth is used. (Note: Requires Dream Mentor to be completed in order to cast Hunter Kit).7052,00076File:Spin Flax.pngSpin Flax can be used to gain Magic and Crafting experience. Use a staff of air for the lowest rune cost.7577,600 77File:Superglass Make.pngCast Superglass Make. Use a smoke battlestaff and giant seaweed for the most efficient inventory. Converts a full inventory; use 3 giant seaweed and 18 bucket of sand for each cast. Both greater profit and experience per hour are achieved without picking up dropped molten glass.7846,800 78File:Tan Leather.pngCast Tan Leather. Use a staff of fire for the lowest rune cost. Tans up to 5 hides per cast.Requires completion of the hard Fremennik Diary.81132,00080File:String Jewellery.pngCast String Jewellery. Use a mud battlestaff for the lowest rune cost.83150,000 86 File:Plank Make.pngCast Plank Make. Use a staff of earth for the lowest rune cost.Requires completion of Dream Mentor.90166,000
AFK: 90,00089File:Recharge Dragonstone.png Cast Recharge Dragonstone. Use a staff of water for the lowest rune cost.97.535,100  

Levels 55–80: Tele-alching
"Tele-alching" is a method which combines the two elements of casting High Level Alchemy and teleporting. To do this, cast High Level Alchemy followed by any teleport then wait 3 game ticks (1.8 seconds). Therefore, it is possible to perform a high alchemy and a teleport spell within 5 game ticks.  Utilizing "F" keys to manually swap back to the magic tab immediately after casting alchemy on an item, then quickly clicking a teleport spell will cause both the alchemy and teleport spell to be cast simultaneously, granting experience for both.  You will, however, only see the animation for the teleport spell.  This works best with High Alchemy and the Civitas Illia Fortis Teleport spells as they are located closely together and require less mouse movement between clicks, though it requires completion of Twilight's Promise.

Tele-alching at Camelot gives up to 144,600 experience per hour and is the cheapest requiring a single law rune per teleport. Tele-alching at Ardougne is at most 151,200 experience per hour, but is a lot more expensive at the cost of an extra law rune per teleport. Additionally, if you have completed Eadgar's Ruse, have fast enough speed and good enough precision, you may consider tele-alching at Trollheim at level 61. You can filter out Combat spells from the spellbook to minimise the distance between the High Level Alchemy spell and teleports such as Camelot Teleport.

Levels 80–99: Stun-alching
At level 80 Magic, Stun-alching becomes available, but does cost much more than high alchemy which is generally profitable or free. The player is to cast High Alchemy, then cast Stun on an NPC, and repeat until desired. For this, you'll want a mud battlestaff (provides free earth/water runes) and a set of metal armour such as iron (full helm, platebody, platelegs, kiteshield) and a d'hide vambrace to bring your magic attack bonus to -65 or lower, this will allow you to splash your stun spell and continually cast it on the same target without needing to wait for their stats to restore, then find a suitable NPC to safespot. A good spot is the basement of the Magic Guild in Yanille. Equip a granite helm, granite legs, and a fighter torso as needed to keep your attack bonus below -65 with a tome of fire and mud staff equipped. Experience rates of 184,000 per hour are possible.

It is possible to add in a teleport to this rotation without missing any game ticks. Using Ardougne Teleport as your choice keeps you within the range of a guard at all times to stun, and with this experience rates of up to 256,000 per hour are possible. This method is immensely click intensive, so it may not be desirable.
 Comparison of magic weapons

Quests for Magic experience

QuestExperiencerewardMagicrequirementOther requirementsWitch's Potion325--Imp Catcher 875--Fairytale I - Growing Pains1,000--Spirits of the Elid1,000, , The Giant Dwarf 1,500, , The Grand Tree2,150-Recipe for Disaster(Lumbridge Guide subquest)2,500-Horror from the Deep4,662-King's Ransom5,000Lunar Diplomacy5,000, , , , , Enakhra's Lament7,000, , , Dream Mentor10,000, , , , , , , The Eyes of Glouphrie12,000 ,  Swan Song15,000, , , , , Watchtower15,250, , , Desert Treasure I20,000, , Total103,262

Category:Magic
Category:Members