thumb|x200px|right|Slayer master Duradel.
Slayer is a skill that allows players to kill monsters that may otherwise be immune to damage. Players must visit a Slayer Master, who will assign them a task to kill certain monsters. Slayer experience is roughly equal to a slain monster's Hitpoints and is awarded each time the player kills an assigned monster.

This guide focuses on the fastest ways to train Slayer. While there are no real requirements to begin Slayer training, it is strongly recommended to have fairly high combat stats and to have completed many quests. This enables the ability to block more undesired Slayer assignments (known as "block slots," which are applied using the "block task" option for 100 Slayer points, and have quest point requirements). High combat stats increase damage output considerably and allow the player to use the best equipment available. Having a higher combat level also gives access to better Slayer Masters, as the low-level Slayer Masters have worse task lists and give fewer Slayer reward points than the higher-level ones. Alternatively, players may choose to train combat stats while in the process of training Slayer.

When slaying for the best experience rates, players will generally want to stick in multicombat areas such as the Catacombs of Kourend. Stacking high level Slayer monsters and hitting them with multi target damage, typically with barrage spells, but also with chins and dihn's bulwark special attacks. This will result in the best damage per second, and thus Slayer experience rates. Against 1x1 and 2x2 monsters, such as araxytes, the dwarf multicannon and venator bow will compete with barrage task rates.  When neither of these options are available, cannonable spots with ranged or melee are preferable. Use Slayer reward points or Turael to skip undesirable tasks as often as possible. 

Slayer provides lots of passive experience in combat skills. Because of the bonuses given by the Slayer helmet (i), it offers some of the best rates of melee combat experience in the game. It also has the potential to be highly profitable.

General information
Access to Slayer masters
In general, obtain tasks from the highest-level Slayer master that your Combat and Slayer levels allow. The monsters they assign generally give more experience than lower-level Slayer masters. Duradel is the best Slayer master to use for the fastest experience, but some players may find that Nieve's (or Steve's) task weighting better suit their preferences. Note that just because the player can access better Slayer masters, this does not directly translate to more experience per hour. That is, maximising experience per hour is not simply a matter of always taking tasks from the highest-level Slayer master that is currently available to the player.

Some players train Slayer using only one master. However, players typically train Slayer by switching between two masters. They do this by using one specific Slayer master that is appropriate for (or lower than) their level, and then switch to using a different higher-levelled Slayer master in order to take advantage of completion milestones. There are Slayer completion milestones for every 10th, 50th, 100th, 250th and 1000th task completion that award additional Slayer points. Higher-levelled masters will assign more difficult tasks than the typical Slayer master would, either in monster assigned or quantity given, but the reward is a greater bonus of Slayer points.

Each Slayer master usually assigns various monsters based on a weight rating, which determines how likely the player is to get that task. Some Slayer masters have unique tasks to themselves, such as Konar quo Maten, who is the only one who assigns hydras. The latter three Slayer masters usually have a shared pool of assignable monsters, albeit with modifications to either the quantity or weighting.

Requirements or quests for accessing different Slayer masters and areas include:
Slayer MasterLocationRequirement to usePoints/task10th50th100th250th1000thTurael/AyaAfter While Guthix SleepsBurthorpeAny level000000SpriaDraynor VillageA Porcine of Interest000000Mazchna/AchtrynDuring While Guthix SleepsCanifisPriest in Peril, 20 combat or 99 Slayer630905070100VannakaEdgeville Dungeon40 combat or 99 Slayer840120100140200ChaeldarZanarisLost City, 70 combat or 99 Slayer1050150250350500Konar quo MatenMount Karuulm75 combat or 99 Slayer18Completing the elite Kourend & Kebos Diary increases Konar's points by approximately 11.1%, from a base task value of 18 to 20.90270450630900Nieve/SteveAfter Monkey Madness IITree Gnome Stronghold85 combat or 99 Slayer12Completing the elite Western Provinces Diary increases Nieve's/Steve's points to match that of Duradel.60180300420600Duradel/KuradalAfter While Guthix SleepsShilo VillageShilo Village, 100 combat+50 Slayer or 99 Slayer1575225375525750KrystiliaEdgevilleAny level (Done at least 1 task)251253756258751250

Access to Slayer tasks
Some Slayer task monsters can be found during a quest or in other locations but require quests to be completed before they can be assigned as Slayer assignments.

Quests
QuestMonsterAssigned byBarbarian TrainingMithril dragon (can be toggled on/off)x30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelWaterfiendx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=DuradelBone VoyageFossil Island Wyvernsx30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelElemental Workshop ICabin FeverCave horrorx30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelJungle horrorx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=ChaeldarContact!Minions of Scabarasx30px|link=NieveDeath to the DorgeshuunMolaniskx30px|link=VannakaDeath PlateauAviansie (can be toggled on/off)x30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelSpiritual creaturesx30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelDesert Treasure IDust devilx30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelDragon Slayer I (started)Black dragonx30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelBlue dragonx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelBronze dragonx30px|link=Konar quo MatenIron dragonx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelRed dragon (can be toggled on/off)x30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelSteel dragonx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelDragon Slayer IIAdamant dragonx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelRune dragonx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelElemental Workshop ISkeletal wyvernx30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelErnest the ChickenKillerwattx30px|link=MazchnaThe Fremennik ExilesBasilisk knight (alternative to normal basilisk)x30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelHaunted MineTerror Dogx30px|link=VannakaHorror from the DeepDagannothx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelLegends' QuestShadow warriorx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=ChaeldarLost CityMutated zygomitex30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelOtherworldly beingx30px|link=VannakaLunar DiplomacySuqahx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelMonkey Madness IIDemonic gorilla (alternative to black demon)x30px|link=Turaelx30px|link=Spriax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelMourning's End Part IIDark beastx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelOlaf's Quest (partial completion)Brine ratx30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelPath of GlouphrieWarped terrorbird (can be toggled on/off)x30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelWarped tortoise (can be toggled on/off)x30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelPerilous MoonsLesser naguax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo MatenA Porcine of InterestSourhogx30px|link=SpriaPriest in PerilAberrant spectrex30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelAbyssal demon (or completion of Fairytale II - Cure a Queen)x30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelAraxytex30px|link=Turaelx30px|link=Spriax30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelBansheex30px|link=Turaelx30px|link=Spriax30px|link=MazchnaBloodveldx30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelCrawling handx30px|link=Turaelx30px|link=Spriax30px|link=MazchnaGargoylex30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelGhoulx30px|link=Mazchnax30px|link=VannakaInfernal magex30px|link=VannakaNechryaelx30px|link=Krystiliax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelVampyrex30px|link=Mazchnax30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Konar quo Matenx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelWerewolfx30px|link=VannakaRegicide (partial completion)Elvesx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=Chaeldarx30px|link=Nievex30px|link=DuradelRoyal TroubleSea snakex30px|link=VannakaRum DealFever spiderx30px|link=Vannakax30px|link=ChaeldarSkippy and the MogresMogresx30px|link=Mazchnax30px|link=Vannaka

Combat levels
By default, Slayer masters will assign tasks based on the player's combat level, essentially blocking tasks that are significantly higher until the player reaches the recommended level. The player can speak with Slayer masters regarding their combat level by choosing the option "Let's talk about the difficulty of my assignments.", and they will let players know if combat level checking is enabled or disabled. By default, players will receive the message,If combat level checking is disabled, players will receive the message, This option can be changed at any time by speaking to them again.

Slayer masters can sometimes assign players a task that may be difficult in combat level to complete. Such examples include blue dragons from Vannaka, which can be a challenging task for low-level players. While baby blue dragons are an option, there are a few requirements to access them. By making sure that combat level checking is enabled, a player will find themselves in fewer difficult combat situations.
Recommended stats
It is strongly recommended to have fairly high combat stats and to have completed a lot of quests for block slots before starting Slayer training. High combat stats increase damage output considerably and allow the player to use the best equipment available. Low-level Slayer masters also have poor task lists and give fewer Slayer reward points than the higher-level ones. 

A mid-level account with a combat level of 70 can start at Slayer master Chaeldar or with Konar quo Maten at level 75, and work their way towards higher-level Slayer masters such as Nieve and Duradel. An account with a combat level of 3 can start at Turael, but it is much more efficient to start at a higher level Slayer master after gaining combat levels and better equipment.

Recommended quests
Completing the following quests can improve the overall Slayer experience:

 Animal Magnetism gives an Ava's device, which reduces ammunition used while using Ranged weapons, and can be upgraded at higher ranged levels.

Desert Treasure I grants access to Ancient Magicks, allowing the use of Ice Burst/Ice Barrage for Slayer tasks
Fairytale I - Growing Pains grants access to fairy rings, granting easy access to many Slayer locations
Dwarf Cannon gives the ability to use a dwarf multicannon, speeding up tasks at the cost of cannonballs
Knight Waves Training Grounds unlocks the Piety prayer, boosting your melee stats 

Bear Your Soul unlocks the Soul bearer, which can transport ensouled heads to your bank

Equipment
Use the best equipment available for the fastest rates. If the player cannot afford best-in-slot equipment, it is best to prioritise melee strength and magic damage upgrades, with neck slot and ring slot items typically offering the most efficient upgrades by cost, followed by other armour upgrades.

The black mask is a very useful item for training Slayer, as it provides significant boosts to melee accuracy and strength when killing monsters on the player's current Slayer task. When imbued through the Nightmare Zone, it provides additional bonuses to ranged accuracy and strength as well as magic accuracy and damage. Both versions of the black mask can be turned into a Slayer helmet after the ability to do so is unlocked from a Slayer master for 400 reward points. It is highly recommended that this upgrade be prioritised as soon as possible, as doing so will allow the player to enjoy the bonuses while killing Slayer monsters requiring special headgear, such as aberrant spectres, banshees, wall beasts, dust devils and smoke devils.

The bracelet of slaughter and expeditious bracelet are popular choices for extending good tasks and quickening bad tasks respectively. Bracelets of slaughter are commonly used for extending barrage tasks like smoke devils which provide valuable experience, while expeditious bracelets are often used for tasks which players might otherwise skip, such as waterfiends. Due to their limited charges, it is often helpful to bring more than one per task. As they provide no combat bonuses, they are commonly equipped only as monsters die (if practical), with gloves with better bonuses being used for the rest of the kill, to maximize damage.

Slayer rings can be used to access the Stronghold Slayer Cave, Slayer Tower and the Fremennik Slayer Dungeon. The first teleport also leads directly to Nieve, making her easily accessible to players using her as their current Slayer master. The ability to craft Slayer rings may be unlocked for 150 reward points. After completing the Haunted Mine and Mourning's End Part II quests, the ring will also have teleports to Tarn's Lair and the Mourner Tunnels, providing quick access to terror dogs and dark beasts respectively.

If the player acquires an eternal gem, they may instead use that to create the eternal slayer ring, sharing all of the benefits of a normal slayer ring but with unlimited teleports.

|-|
Melee=

For Melee tasks, use equipment that offers the highest strength and accuracy bonuses, such as Amulet of rancour, the Ultor ring, and Ferocious gloves in combination with Torva armour and primordial boots. Sunfire fanatic armour can be used instead to give a higher Prayer bonus, reducing the amount of Prayer points drained per second.

The abyssal whip is a strong and easily obtainable weapon that can be used for melee tasks, with the more expensive Ghrazi rapier being an even better alternative for melee combat. Avernic or dragon defenders should always be used with these weapons, except against wyverns. For dragon tasks, players should use extended super antifire potions so they can hold their defender. 

The charged scythe of Vitur offers the best damage output against monsters that are 3x3 or larger, such as dark beasts, kalphite, and gargoyles. This weapon can be quite expensive to use, however. The dragon hunter lance is the best weapon to use against draconic enemies, and emberlight should be used against demons. If the player cannot afford a dragon hunter lance or Ghrazi rapier for dragons, a stab weapon such as Zamorakian hasta or Osmumten's fang should be used.

The Soulreaper axe is the strongest melee weapon available for most 1x1 and 2x2 slayer targets. When slaying conventional (e.g., non-dragon, non-demon) 1x1 targets such as ankou, earth warriors, small dagannoth, trolls, etc., the axe is a drastically more expensive option than the second-best melee weapon for such targets, the ghrazi rapier, but it offers 12-15% more damage per second. The axe also outperforms the Scythe of Vitur on common 2x2 slayer targets by 3-5%, such as suqah, mutated bloodveld, and large dagannoths. The axe is outperformed by emberlight against most demons, such as greater demons, lesser demons, abyssal demons, demonic gorillas, and tormented demons. The axe is outperformed by the dragon hunter lance against dragons, as most are weaker to stab than slash, and boast high defensive stats, unlike most other slayer monsters. Unlike the scythe, the axe does not expend charges to use. 

Dragon claws are generally the best special attack weapon to use for single combat. Dinh's bulwark is better for certain multi-combat areas (such as dagannoth), and is useful to draw aggression, however this can also be achieved with the use of a goading potion, freeing up special attack energy to be used for a weapon like the crystal halberd which can hit multiple targets. The dragon dagger is much cheaper than the dragon claws however, and the special attack can outperform dragon claws against monsters that have low Defence. Alternatively, players can use Saradomin godsword to restore Hitpoints and Prayer points during a task.

Recommended equipment

|-|
Magic (Barrage)=

Magic is commonly used to barrage or burst multiple monsters at once for fast Slayer experience. The Slayer helmet must be imbued to gain the accuracy and damage benefits on an assigned Slayer monster.

Use equipment that gives the highest Magic damage bonuses, such as kodai wand, occult necklace, imbued god cape, and virtus robes.

Use a weapon that can autocast Ancient Magicks. The cheapest of these is the ancient staff. The ancient sceptre, nightmare staff, and Kodai wand are progressively stronger alternatives.

Most Slayer monsters which are commonly barraged (such as greater Nechryael and dust devils) have very low Magic defence, so having a higher Magic accuracy makes negligible difference on damage output. For those tasks players may wear equipment with high Prayer bonus, such as ring of the gods (i), devout boots and book of darkness. Certain monsters (such as smoke devils and warped jellies) do have Magic defence however, so Magic accuracy will matter against them and players should wear equipment with high Magic accuracy bonuses.

Dinh's bulwark special attack, fast attacking ranged weapon such as a toxic blowpipe, dwarf multicannon, or a goading potion can be used to draw aggression of monsters into a barrage pile. If additional Melee experience is desired, using a Crystal halberd on stacked monsters is a solid option.

Recommended equipment

|-|
Ranged=

The venator bow is commonly used by players who desire a less intense form of Slayer training. The bow's ricochet effect easily grabs the aggression of multiple monsters, allowing it to be used on tasks that are commonly bursted/barraged at the cost of less Slayer experience per hour. On the other hand, the toxic blowpipe is the best option for players using Turael to boost Slayer points and for those do not value gaining Melee experience, as the blowpipe is usually faster than using Melee on most Turael tasks but at a higher cost.

If players do not have either of these weapons, then it is not recommended to use Ranged in general Slayer training, as Ranged can be comfortably trained without a slayer task, and minor amount of experience can be gained through use of a dwarf multicannon regardless. However, some tasks may be preferable to be safespotted using Ranged if the target is vulnerable to it and the player wishes to conserve supplies.

If using Ranged, the slayer helmet must be imbued to gain the accuracy and damage benefits on an assigned Slayer monster.

Recommended equipment

|-|
Ranged (Wilderness Slayer)=

Ranged is primarily used for Wilderness Slayer to boost Slayer points. The Webweaver bow and Craw's bow are the best weapons to use for most tasks, but for some tasks the toxic blowpipe is better due to its higher attack speed, and may be additionally preferred for the lesser risk. Players should bring 4 strong items, while the rest of the equipment should be cheap and replaceable items that the player will not mind losing. Notably, ether in the Webweaver and Craw's bow are always lost on death so players should not bring more than they are willing to lose.

If using Ranged, the slayer helmet must be imbued to gain the accuracy and damage benefits on an assigned Slayer monster.

Recommended equipment

Inventory

Dwarf multicannon and some cannonballs (not all of your cannonballs, as they will be lost upon death to a PKer)
Spare expeditious bracelets
1-2 divine ranging potions, 1 stamina potion and 1 anti-venom+
Saradomin brews and super restores to survive player killers
A teleport out of Wilderness such as royal seed pod or amulet of glory
Teleport to house tablets or ring of dueling to restore stats
1 extended super antifire (when needed)

Using Slayer reward points
Slayer reward points are awarded for the 5th consecutive task and every task thereafter. These can be used to cancel undesirable tasks, permanently block assignments and unlock useful rewards.

When training Slayer for the fastest experience, this is generally an optimal order for spending Slayer reward points:

Blocks (including the special Fossil Island Wyvern block)
Superior Slayer monsters
Slayer helmet
Extensions
Extra unlocks (such as Slayer rings)

Cancelling and blocking tasks
Slayer reward points are mainly used to cancel undesirable tasks, which offer slow experience, poor profit or mediocre experience but take too long to complete. Cancelling a task costs 30 reward points each time, making it potentially expensive to try and get a specific assignment.

Tasks that the player does not wish to ever do can be permanently blocked. The cost to block a task differs depending on the Slayer master:
 Turael/Aya and Spria: 40 points
 Mazchna/Achtryn: 50 points
 Vannaka: 60 points
 Chaeldar: 70 points
 Konar quo Maten: 80 points
 Nieve/Steve: 90 points
 Duradel/Kuradal: 100 points
 Krystilia: 100 points

Each Slayer master has their own individual block list. Up to seven assigned monsters (or monster groups) can be blocked per Slayer master. To block an assignment, 50 quest points are required per slot, totaling up to 300 quest points for six slots. A seventh slot is available only with the completion of the elite Lumbridge & Draynor Diary. For toggled tasks like lizardmen, the player should simply cancel the toggle and the task itself, so that they cannot obtain the task anymore, which essentially acts as a block. With 500 Slayer points, a block can be applied to Fossil Island Wyverns. While significantly more expensive than any task block in-game, the player has the ability to freely toggle on and off this block as they desire.

The main goal for Slayer training is to spend as much time as possible doing good tasks, and as little time as possible doing bad tasks. As such, it is best to make use of all the available blocks as soon as possible, and then use the cancel option as often as it can be used while maintaining a stable level of Slayer reward points. Players are also strongly advised to keep enough points in reserve to cancel several tasks in a row, in case of multiple undesirable assignments being given.

The undesirable tasks with the highest weighting (highest chance of being given) should be blocked, as these will appear more often resulting in players burning through skips much faster compared to a task with a lower weighting. If the task is one given via toggle, the player can "block" the task in the future by simply toggling off, though points will need to be used again if the player wants to be assigned them. Otherwise, block tasks as needed; for example, between the choice of spiritual creatures (7) or rune dragons (2) from Duradel, blocking the former would be more beneficial than the latter. 

While the guide assumes that the player is training with Duradel, Nieve has a similar task list to him, albeit with the addition of some less desirable tasks such as brine rats and scabarites along with less weighting on other tasks. Simply adjust the task list to whatever slayer master is being used. Nieve, Konar and Duradel should be put into one group for non-Wilderness slayer, while Krystilia should be put in another due to being Wilderness-only slayer. 

An example of a block list for non-Wilderness slayer with these three masters in consideration could be:

Wyrms (bad task in general when accounting for efficient slayer)
Drakes (same as above)
Trolls 
Suqah (good for experience, very poor drop table)
Any remaining tasks up to preference

For Krystilia, a block list would likely have the following:

Bloodveld
Spiritual creatures
Green dragons
Any remaining tasks up to preference

When slaying for the fastest experience, spend the majority of the time doing high experience tasks, and spend the rest of the time doing relatively fast tasks for points. Even though a certain task offers decent experience in itself but takes fairly long to complete, such as black demons, it is likely not worth doing as this would mean spending less time doing tasks that offer much better experience per hour, thereby decreasing overall experience rates. The use of an Expeditious bracelet will help speed up undesirable tasks that need to be done.

If slaying solely for money-making purposes, the block list should be adjusted to ensure that the desired task(s) have a better chance of being assigned. For example, if a player was looking for araxytes from Duradel (having a weight of 10), their chances of getting it would improve if they blocked abyssal demons and dark beasts (who have a weight of 12 and 11 respectively). This list would be subjected to personal preference and thus does not account for slayer experience.

It is also required to have good gear before attempting a variant of the assigned monster, since these are generally stronger than their base variant in question.

Examples of alternate slayer would include:

Cerberus (hellhounds)
Demonic gorillas, Skotizo (black demons)
Kree'arra (aviansies)
Abyssal Sire (abyssal demon)
Thermonuclear smoke devil (smoke devil)
Araxxor (araxyte)
Tormented demon, K'ril Tsutsaroth, Skotizo (greater demons)
King Black Dragon (black dragons)
Vorkath (blue dragons)
Kraken (cave kraken)
Kalphite Queen (kalphites)
Dagannoth Kings (dagannoth)
Alchemical Hydra (hydras)

Note that alternate slayer with Konar is more complicated, due to her location-only requirement. Many options become inaccessible, while the ones she does offer will also require that specific location to allow it. For example, if the player wanted to kill the Abyssal Sire on her tasks, she would have to assign them to slay them in the Abyss in order to do so; any other location would not allow it.

Unlocking new tasks
With unlocking, you do not need a quest to access them. Instead, you pay with Slayer points to get these monsters for your Slayer assignment. Be aware that these task unlocks generally apply to high level Slayer Masters.

If you decide to stop doing assignments which are toggleable, consider if you will do the task again, or if alternatives are allowed, as these tasks generally have a high weight value and can potentially intercept a desirable task. TzHaar and lizardmen should generally not be blocked, as the former can be easily "cancelled" by entering and leaving the Fight Caves, while the latter is a very fast cannon task. Others, like red dragons and basilisks, should not be toggled on at all if not planning to kill them, since they are quite far from a bank and take a while to clear.

Slayer UnlockMonster taskAssigned By Notes  Seeing RedRed dragonsKonar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/Kuradal Baby or brutal red dragons can be killed insteadI hope you mith me Mithril dragonsKonar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/KuradalRequires the player to speak with Otto about Barbarian trainingWatch the birdieAviansieChaeldar, Konar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/KuradalKree'arra and his bodyguards also count for this task.Hot stuffTzHaarChaeldar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/KuradalTzTok-Jad can be killed instead if you take the challenge, or TzKal-Zuk if you have defeated him once.Reptile got rippedLizardmenChaeldar, Konar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/KuradalCan kill Lizardman, lizardman brutes, or lizardman shamans. Like a boss  All normal bossesKonar, Nieve/Steve, Duradel/KuradalCorporeal Beast and The Nightmare not included. Assigned bosses are determined if you meet the access requirement(s).Warped RealityWarped creaturesKonar, Duradel, Nieve, and ChaeldarMust have crystal chime in their inventory to fight them, so started The Path of Glouphrie is required.  Earmuffs or Slayer helmet recommended.

Task extension
Some tasks can be extended for Slayer points, which will greatly increase the number that you can be assigned if they give you that creature for a task. Extending a task will significantly increase the amount of monsters assigned across all slayer masters, even if they normally assign less than another master would.

Only extend tasks that have good value to them, especially if they offer good money or experience. For example, Duradel normally assigns 60-80 araxytes. However, unlocking the extension will cause him to instead increase the amount to 200-250 araxytes. Araxytes are an already lucrative task, as they have a superior, a boss variant, can be mostly AFK'ed and offer good experience. On the other hand, extending a task such as metal dragons are discouraged, since they don't have a lot of good drops or offer reasonable experience to justify extending them.

Task storage
With the Task Storage perk unlocked (requiring 500 Slayer points), players may store their current Slayer task, saving it for later. They may swap their current task and stored task when desired for no charge. Purchasing Task Storage is up to the player's preference; while the perk has a high upfront cost, it allows the player to break up long and monotonous Slayer tasks with potentially shorter ones.

Superior Slayer monsters
right|173x173px
With the Bigger and Badder perk unlocked (requiring 50 Slayer points), several monsters have a 1/200 chance of attracting a superior variant of the monster after they are killed. Superior monsters are stronger than their normal counterparts, typically having a higher max hit and some of them may have a simple mechanic. They can also drop the valuable and sought-after eternal gem and imbued heart, both of which sell considerably well on the Grand Exchange, along with a 10x increased drop rate on clue scrolls should the monster be capable of dropping clue scrolls.

Activating this perk is optional, but recommended since you can toggle it off without penalty if you do not want to fight superior monsters.

Killing perks 
The only recommended killing perk to obtain is Gargoyle Smasher should the player do gargoyle tasks. High levelled Slayer masters will assign gargoyles quite frequently, and players will save a large amount of time by automatically smashing Gargoyles whenever they reach 9 hitpoints or lower, and automatically smashes Dawn and Dusk when they reach 8 hitpoints. Shroom Sprayer can also be unlocked, but only if the player completes mutated zygomite tasks.

Dwarf multicannon
thumb|Green represents double shots. Red means no fire. For 1x1 monsters, players should lure them onto the green area.
The dwarf multicannon adds a significant amount of extra damage output, and it should be used whenever viable. Using the cannon can be quite expensive, but the cost is justified by the saved time compared to not using one. For example, certain Melee tasks like suqahs, dagannoth and kalphites offer good experience per hour with the cannon as the cannon does a lot of damage in these multi-combat areas, but without the cannon the experience rates would be mediocre at best. The player will also gain some passive Ranged experience while getting nearly as much Melee experience per hour as the player would without using a cannon.

The dwarf multicannon is typically used to speed up Melee tasks, and to lure smoke devils. For Melee tasks, it is best to find the best spot to stand to allow double cannon shots against one monster. This allows faster kills, slightly increasing experience rates. Around 750–1,500 cannonballs are used on an average task given by Duradel in a non-multiway combat area, whilst tasks which take place in a multiway combat area can exceed over 1,500.

Should the player not be able to afford to use the cannon at all, it is better to simply make the money for the cannonballs rather than train Slayer without the cannon. Players should also consider how much time they will spend on tasks where the cannon is used, as having a cannon-heavy task list is much more expensive and generally less efficient than doing a lot of barrage tasks. For example, it may be a good idea not to extend tasks where little to no money is made back from the drops, such as black demons or suqahs. On some cannonable tasks monster drops will cover some of the cost of using the cannon, but usually not enough to break even. Most barrage tasks on the other hand usually break even or even profit slightly.

Prayer
Use protection and offensive prayers when training Slayer. Players will need to bring prayer potions or super restores to every task, and have a good supply of them in the bank. It is also recommended to have a high Prayer level, as it allows you to pay less attention to your Prayer points, and having a higher Prayer level allows you to restore more prayer points per prayer potion dose. The holy wrench also boosts the amount of prayer gained from prayer potions, thus reducing the number of prayer potions used. These make the overall lifespan of your potions much higher, and save a lot of money in the long run.

Having the rejuvenation pool (or better) in the player-owned house or a quick access to any altar to restore Prayer points before starting a new task is useful. However, players should not constantly teleport out from the task area to restore Prayer points and run back there, as this lowers experience rates significantly and it is worth the money to simply drink prayer potions whenever needed. Furthermore, if a player leaves an area where they were fighting a popular slayer creature, it may open up the location for another player to "take their spot".

The best available offensive prayers should always be used for Melee and Ranged, and also for Magic if having a higher Magic accuracy makes a notable difference on damage output (such as against smoke devils and Warped Jellies). It is recommended not to use offensive Magic prayers against monsters with low Magic defence, as this would have a negligible benefit to damage output unless the prayer offers one or more max hits. However, for Melee and Ranged offensive prayers increases the max hit and thus the damage output considerably, and using them is worth the cost.

Use protection prayers on dangerous tasks where the monsters would deal heavy damage. Such tasks include all barrage tasks and most tasks in multi-combat areas, metal dragons, dark beasts, aberrant spectres and other damage-heavy tasks. Protection prayers along with Prayer-boosting armour (such as Proselyte armour) can also be used as a low-effort alternative to defensive armour and food. This requires paying less attention overall as the player will not take damage and the Prayer points are drained at a slower rate.

Prayer flicking is a tedious and a click-intensive but an extremely efficient way of saving Prayer points. If you are willing to put the effort, it can more than triple the life span of your prayer points with proper timing.

 Slayer locations
While some Slayer monsters are found in one or multiple habitats, there are dungeons throughout RuneScape where many monsters a Slayer master can assign can be found.
LocationAdvantages Disadvantages  Slayer Tower Has various Slayer monsters, some of them being less crowded due to other locations. You also receive more experience if you have the Morytania diaries done. Monsters on the upper floors are annoying to reach without high Agility and a cannon can't be used in the tower. Fremennik Slayer DungeonHas various Slayer monsters, with most of them being found only in the dungeon.Can be somewhat annoying to reach the end of the dungeon without high Agility, some areas can be crowded.Stronghold Slayer CaveHas a handful of monsters that medium/high levelled Slayer masters assign, and close to a bank. A cannon can be used in this cave.Often crowded. Catacombs of KourendSimilar to the Stronghold Slayer Cave, but with stronger monsters and in some cases, better drops than those found elsewhere. It is also a multi-combat area so you can semi-afk more efficiently here. Some tasks are very efficient here, like dust devils and nechryael. Somewhat far without teleports to the dungeon, and a cannon can't be placed in the dungeon.Chasm of FireContains lesser, greater and black Demons. The black demons here can be more easily cannoned than those in Taverley Dungeon.Can be far if optimal teleports are not unlocked.Kalphite CaveMore kalphites can be found in here.Wilderness Slayer CaveAll locations are multicombat and cannonable. Monsters also drop unique wilderness tertiary drops which can significantly increase average value of each kill.Is in the Wilderness so high risk of PKers interrupting tasks.Iorwerth DungeonUpon their deaths, monsters in the dungeon have a chance of dropping 3-5 crystal shards, while superior slayer monsters are guaranteed to drop 6-10.Must have completed Song of the Elves to access Prifddinas.
The following transportation methods help players get to their tasks faster.

 Fairy ring teleport system - grants quick access to many high-level Slayer tasks. You can use the fairy rings after starting Fairytale II - Cure a Queen with a Lunar/Dramen staff. Not needed if you have completed all the Lumbridge & Draynor Village sets.
Lunar Magic - used for NPC Contact, allowing you to talk to any Slayer master without travelling to them. However, the rewards interface cannot be accessed this way, so travel to any Slayer master may be necessary to cancel. Also used for Spellbook Swap to access non-tablet teleports like Trollheim Teleport and Ghorrock Teleport in the Ancient Magicks book. You must complete Lunar Diplomacy to use Lunar Magic. You must complete Desert Treasure I for Ancient Magicks.
 Slayer ring - can be used to teleport to several Slayer locations (obtained from a Slayer master for Slayer points). Slayer rings should be made in batches and treated as disposable to allow more loot to be banked. Players who wish to skip or block a task should use the Slayer ring to teleport to the Stronghold Slayer Cave, which is right next to Nieve.
Karamja gloves 3 - Reward for Hard Karamja Diary. (It allows you to teleport to Shilo Village for quickly getting a new task from Duradel). Karamja gloves 4 allows the player to transport directly to Duradel.
Xeric's talisman - can be used to teleport around Great Kourend to enter the Catacombs of Kourend or to fight Lizardmen.

Player-owned houses
Player-owned houses are a great asset for Slayer training, though it does take considerable input to get the required Construction levels.

Useful unlocks
At , portal chambers can be built. The portals can then be constructed and set to teleport to various destinations around RuneScape, covering many of the teleports that the spellbooks have. You need to have the respective Magic level and other requirements completed to attune a portal to a specific location.

At , a portal nexus can be built. The nexus combines the various portals into a single object and room.

At , an Ancient, Lunar, or Dark altar can be built. These can be used to swap to Ancient Magicks, the Lunar spellbook, or the Arceuus spellbook, respectively, or to swap from any spellbook back to the Standard spellbook. At , these can be upgraded to the Occult altar, providing access to the other two spellbooks.

At , the ornate rejuvenation pool can be built, regenerating the player's special attack energy, run energy, prayer points, reduced stats, and health when interacted with. This saves a lot of supplies if you use the house a lot.

At , the ornate jewellery box can be built, providing unlimited uses of the ring of dueling, games necklace, skills necklace, combat bracelet, amulet of glory, and ring of wealth teleports.

At  and , the spirit tree & fairy ring can be built. This provides the perks of both the spirit tree and fairy ring at once, which when combined with the ornate rejuvenation pool will save lots of supplies and essentially allows you to reach anywhere in RuneScape without having to use other items. It is worth noting two superior gardens can be built for a spirit tree in one and one fairy ring in the other garden before level 95 Construction with a crystal saw and stew Construction boosts.

Location
Scrolls of redirection can be used to teleport to player-owned house portals other than the house's current location.

 Level Location Advantages Disadvantages  Rimmington Close to Mudskipper Point for mogre, ice warrior, and skeletal wyvern tasks. Fairy ring code  teleports directly to Mudskipper Point.
 Far from Slayer masters.  Taverley 
 Somewhat close to Trollheim for troll, spiritual mage, spiritual ranger, and spiritual warrior tasks.
 Close to the Heroes' Guild and Taverley Dungeon for blue dragon tasks.
 Close to the Burthorpe Slayer master for reassignment of tasks. The games necklace and Trollheim tablet teleport closer to all these locations (except blue dragons).  Pollnivneach 
 Close to the Smoke Dungeon. The Camulet is somewhat slower but cheaper.
 Far from Slayer masters.  Hosidius Close to one of the entrances to the Catacombs of Kourend. The Kourend Castle Teleport and the "Xeric's Heart" teleport on Xeric's talisman are significantly faster.  Rellekka Quick access to Lunar Isle for a spellbook swap.
 Close to the Fremennik Slayer Dungeon.
 Close to the Lighthouse for dagannoth tasks.
 Close to the Waterbirth Island Dungeon for high-level dagannoth kills (level 90 dagannoths and the Dagannoth Kings).
 Close to brine rats. The Lunar Moonclan Teleport or tablet can be used to get to Lunar Isle, and the Lunar altar can be built at 80 Construction in the player-owned house.
 The Slayer ring teleports to the Fremennik Slayer Dungeon.
 Fairy ring code  or the games necklace teleport closer to the Lighthouse dagannoths.
 The enchanted lyre teleports close to the POH portal.
 Fairy ring code  teleports closer to brine rats.
 Far from Slayer masters.  Brimhaven 
 Close to the Brimhaven Dungeon.
 Fastest way to Duradel without the use of the NPC Contact or any means of teleportation such as Karamja gloves 3 other than using the spirit tree patch followed by the cart-ride.
 Close to a bank. Few non-Slayer uses.  Yanille Close to blue dragons and greater demons in the Ogre Enclave. The Watchtower Teleport and the Castle Wars teleport on the ring of dueling are relatively close.
 Far from Slayer masters.  Prifddinas Close to the Iorwerth Dungeon, a respawn point, and a bank. The teleport crystal is essentially free.
 Far from Slayer masters.

Task summary
This is a list of monsters assigned by Duradel, along with the pros and cons of completing the task. This table aims to empower players in choosing their tasks based on the pros and cons of each task reflecting on experience rates, profit and the amount of effort required.
 Assignment Slayer level Weight Pros Cons Do/Skip/Block Approx. XP/h  Aberrant spectres607 Relatively low-effort task. Valuable herbs and seeds cover most of the costs of using the cannon. Cannot be lured into double-hit cannon spots properly, which results in mediocre experience rates. Not worth doing for XP unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip 35,000Abyssal demons 8512Decent profit from abyssal whip drops. Decent experience when barraging. Decent experience and low-effort when using Venator bow.Long task and very commonly assigned. Consider blocking the task if money is not an issue. Do/Block80,000 (Magic)
53,000 (Venator Bow)
40,000 (Melee)Adamant dragons12Fast task with high combat stats and when using a dragon hunter lance.Poor experience rates and mediocre drops for their level. Do/Skip15,000Ankous15Decent experience and relatively fast task when barraging in the Catacombs of Kourend. While risky, barraging Ankous in the Wilderness Slayer Cave provides up to 90,000 Slayer experience per hour and drops will cover the cost of using Blighted ancient ice sacks.Barraging will result in a loss due to lack of valuable drops. Do55,000 (Magic)Araxytes9210Good experience, decent profit, and boss version available. Unextended tasks can be done for quick points.Venom resistance required. Do100,000 (Cannon and Venator bow)Aviansie1 8Kree'arra can be killed on task for good profit. Poor experience rates. Killing Kree'arra effectively requires very expensive equipment, and the profit is very inconsistent due to the value mostly being in the rare unique drops. Should not be unlocked10,000Basilisk407Basilisk Knights can be killed on task for good profit.Poor experience rates. Should not be unlocked15,000Bloodvelds508Good experience rates when cannoning mutated bloodvelds in the Meiyerditch Laboratories. Drops cover the cost of using the cannon if in Meiyerditch Laboratories.Travelling to the Meiyerditch Laboratories can take a while. Using a cannon will result in a loss in the Stronghold Slayer Cave. Do100,000 (Cannon and Venator Bow)
80,000 (Cannon and Melee)Black demons18Decent experience rates, low-effort task. Demonic gorillas can be killed for good profit at the expense of experience rates.Long task, especially if killing demonic gorillas. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Skip unless killing demonic gorillas for profit, or if Slayer points are an issue. Skip45,000Black dragons19If killing baby black dragons, a very fast task when unextended. Brutal black dragons can be killed for profit at higher levels.Mediocre experience rates. Do30,000 Blue dragons 14 Vorkath can be killed on task for good and consistent profit.Poor experience rates. Should be skipped if not killing Vorkath for profit. Skip25,000 Bosses Varies (1 for all except a few)12Can be a relatively quick task depending on what boss you get, in addition to 5,000 Slayer experience upon completion of the task. Can potentially receive very valuable rare drops.Some bosses can be rather annoying to kill, and requires 200 Slayer points to unlock boss tasks. Should not be unlockedVariesCave horror584Relatively fast task. Drops cover the cost of using the cannon.Poor experience rates. Not worth doing for XP unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip25,000Cave kraken 87 9Decent and low-effort profit when killing the boss variant. Poor experience rates. Killing cave krakens will result in a guaranteed loss due to the supplies needed to kill them with little net gain. Block15,000Dagannoth19 Good experience rates.Can be crowded in the Lighthouse Dungeon. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Do85,000Dark beasts9011Fast task when unextended. Relatively low-effort task. Somewhat mediocre experience rates. Do42,000 Drakes 848Relatively low-effort task with high combat stats.Mediocre experience rates and long task. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip/Block35,000Dust devils65 5Good experience rates when barraging in the Catacombs of Kourend. Drops cover the rune costs. Can be crowded in the Catacombs of Kourend. Do100,000–110,000 (Magic)
60,000 (Venator bow)
35,000 (Melee)Elves14Relatively low-effort task.Poor experience rates. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip25,000Fire giants17Relatively low-effort task. Relatively fast with imbued black mask and water wave+. Somewhat mediocre experience rates. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Good Magic XP using water spells due to 100% weakness. Do/Skip40,000Fossil Island Wyverns 66, 825Relatively low-effort task.Poor experience rates and mediocre profit. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Block with the unique unlock15,000 Gargoyles75 8 Decent profit, relatively low-effort task.Mediocre experience rates. Can be crowded in the Slayer Tower. Skip 30,000 Greater demons19 Relatively fast task when unextended. Relatively low-effort task. Tormented Demons and K'ril Tsutsaroth can be killed on task for profit.Mediocre experience rates and commonly assigned. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Do/Block38,000 (Regular)
50,000 (Tormented Demons) Hellhounds 110Cerberus can be killed on task for good long-term profit. Relatively low-effort task if killing regular hellhounds, and good source of hard clue scrolls.Commonly assigned and long task. Using the cannon will result in a loss due to lack of drops. Killing Cerberus effectively requires expensive equipment, and the profit is very inconsistent due to the value mostly being in the rare unique drops. Should be blocked unless killing Cerberus for profit. Do/Block40,000 (Regular)
25,000 (Cerberus)Iron dragons15Somewhat fast task with high stats and when using the dragon hunter lance.Mediocre experience rates, rather poor drops. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip35,000Kalphites19Good experience rates when cannoning the soldiers. Relatively low-effort task. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Do75,000Kurasks704Somewhat decent profit.Can only be harmed with leaf-bladed weaponry, broad bolts or Slayer Dart, which results in poor experience rates. Not worth doing for XP unless Slayer points are an issue. Do/Skip 20,000Lizardmen110 Decent experience rates when cannoning lizardmen. Relatively fast task. Commonly assigned, which makes this task not worth unlocking. Using the cannon will result in a loss. Should not be unlocked50,000 Mithril dragons19Very fast task with high combat stats and when using a dragon hunter lance.Low experience rates and commonly assigned. Deal heavy damage. Toggle on/Should not be unlocked30,000Mutated Zygomites572 Relatively fast task.  Poor experience rates. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue.Skip10,000Nechryael80 9Good experience rates when barraging in the Catacombs of Kourend. Decent profit if meleeing.Often crowded in the Catacombs of Kourend. Do100,000 (Magic)
40,000 (Melee)Red dragons18Decent profit with high stats and when using a dragon hunter lance.Mediocre experience rates. Should not be unlocked30,000Rune dragons12 Very fast task when unextended and using a dragon hunter lance. Good profit.Poor experience rates. Deal heavy damage without good defensive armour. Do/Skip18,000Skeletal Wyverns727Decent profit with high combat stats and when using a dragon hunter lance.Poor experience rates. Skip 15,000Smoke devils939Barraging smoke devils currently offers the best experience rates in the game. Drops cover the rune costs.Luring smoke devils properly requires a lot of practice and effort. Do150,000 (Magic)
55,000 (Melee) Spiritual creatures 63, 68, 837Mages can give decent profit and have relatively low hitpoints (75 for Zamorak, 85 for Saradomin)Poor experience rates. Not worth doing for XP unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip25,000 Steel dragons1 7Relatively fast task with high combat stats and when using a dragon hunter lance.Mediocre experience rates. Do/Skip 30,000Suqahs 18Decent experience rates. Relatively fast task when unextended.No notable drops to cover the cost of using the cannon. Requires good defensive armour as well as Protect from Magic since they hit hard with both attack styles. Do/Skip55,000Trolls 16Decent experience rates when cannoning ice trolls on Jatizso or mountain trolls at Mount Quidamortem. Drops cover some of the costs of using the cannon.Ice trolls deal heavy damage. Travelling to Jatizso can take a while. Do/Skip50,000TzHaar110Good experience rates when barraging in the inner part of Mor Ul Rek. Drops cover the rune costs. Alternatively, the option to do the Fight Caves on task will be given, or The Inferno if it's already completed. Task can be 'skipped' easily by dying inside The Inferno or Fight Caves if it is not desired.Barraging requires using blood spells. Completing the Inferno or the Fight Caves quickly requires having expensive equipment. Do/Should not be unlocked100,000 (Magic)
Varies (Inferno/Fight Caves)Vyrewatch 388Killing Vyrewatch Sentinels in Darkmeyer can yield a somewhat decent profit. Does not require supplies, as prayer can be restored at the Statue.Can only be harmed with the Ivandis flail or blisterwood flail, which results in poor experience rates. Should not be unlocked15,000Warped creaturess568Decent experience when using a cannon. Drops cover cost of cannonballs. Food drops and bones to peaches can sustain a high level player.Mediocre experience when not using a cannon. Dungeon is multi-combat and creatures attack with both melee and range. Should not be unlocked55,000 (Cannon)Waterfiends1 2Somewhat decent drops. Poor experience rates. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip15,000Wyrms 628Somewhat decent drops.Mediocre experience rates. Not worth doing unless Slayer points are an issue. Skip35,000

Quest experience

QuestExperiencereward SlayerrequirementOther requirementsNatural history quiz(miniquest) 1,000--Recipe for Disaster(Dwarf subquest)1,000--Animal Magnetism 1,000 , , A Porcine of Interest1,000 - - The General's Shadow(miniquest)2,000 --Royal Trouble5,000Wanted! 5,000- Lair of Tarn Razorlor(miniquest)5,000-The Path of Glouphrie20,000, , , Perilous Moons40,000,,,Champions' Challenge(invisible miniquest)40,348-The Fremennik Exiles50,000, , ,  Monkey Madness II80,000, , , Total191,348

Alternate training methods
Aside from quest rewards and traditional slayer training, the Temple Trekking minigame can provide Slayer XP at a low hourly rate via the XP rewards, alongside Agility, Firemaking, Fishing, Mining, Thieving, and Woodcutting. This may be useful for some accounts in niche scenarios - resource-lacking / Ironmen / combat focused accounts moving to skilling, or quest requirements. 

The money-making guide for Temple Trekking contains a profitable route and good process, though it can be adjusted to take easier companions instead of the recommended Hard ones if focusing purely on the XP tome rewards. XP tomes grant between 1100 and 1650 in one of the skills listed above (randomly selected, you do not get to choose which skill), and can be claimed once per trek as a reward.  

Around 40 treks an hour are possible fully focusing (and if skipping all combat), and with the average XP tome granting 1375 XP, 55,000 XP across all skills can be expected, an average of around 7800 XP per skill. A more leisurely 30 treks / hour results in around 41,250 - around 5800XP / skill.  
+SkillXP per hour (avg)Slayer5800 - 7800Agility5800 - 7800Firemaking5800 - 7800Fishing5800 - 7800Mining5800 - 7800Thieving5800 - 7800Woodcutting5800 - 7800Total41,250 - 55,000

Category:Slayer